The Sacred Owl
by Owlsley Primo

It's really very simple.  There's this three foot cement Owl that everyone goes
apeshit over.  Oterwise reserved and intelligent Reedies will risk life and
limb to get The Owl all for their very own.  Riots break out at its every
public appearance.  Property is damaged.  People are injured.  Studying
stops.

Skeptical?  Sound silly to you?  But just wait until you see the Owl.  You
too will be drawn to its irresistible beauty, its unique charm, and the
subtle thrill of the gang fight.

This institutionalized mayhem begins somewhere in the shadows of an 
Eastmoreland night in 1913.  Some House F (now Doyle Dorm) residents
slip out and grab a large lawn ornament in the form of an owl.  They
drag it back to its new home, high atop the old dorm block.  A legend is
born.

Very soon the Owl becomes an object of contention, for the boys in the 
next dorm covet the Owl in its glory, and attempt to make it their own by
lowering it down with a rope.  They are detected, apprehended, and
punished (bent over with lowered pants that House F might smite them in
their wickedness).  The Owl moves inside.

At this point the true nature of the Owl, its true power over Reedie's souls, 
became clear.  It is not enough to simply possess the Owl---the Owl must be 
shown.  Its owner must flaunt its glory before the desirous have-nots, who
are in turn driven to violence in their frenzy to get it.  All Doyle Owl
stories are simply tragedies based upon this profound irony.

At first this phenomenon was associated with the House F formal held 
every year in the Commons (now the Student Union), where the Owl would be
displayed.  Efforts to steal the Owl usually intensified in anticipation of
this event.  One year saw an unusually vigorous effort by House G.  First
they kidnapped nine residents of House F, demanding the Owl and their
G (House F had also stolen their big neon G) as ransom, but without 
success.  Undaunted, several days later they staged an attack on House F which
was attended by five carloads of police.  The police must have been 
disappointed, however, for they left shortly, declaring they were not 
needed.  Soon a two hour siege began, featuring water, mud, and ammonia bombs
(the last an invention of House G).  House F quelled the attack, however,
when it brought its fire hose into play, also breaking windows and inflicting
water damage on the building's interior.

Another example from the murky past is an Oregonian article in 1954.  The Owl
has by now assumed its rightful title, the Doyle Owl, and it has been covered 
with orange paint.  Five students placed it on consignment with the
downtown Kharouba Art Gallery.  Another student arrived with a policeman
to demand its repossession, but a call to the college president established
that it was common college property, not belonging to any person or 
dormitory.  Thus we see that the Owl had passed its liminal period,
in which it was possessed solely by the Doyle residents, and had become
a sacred object for the entire campus.  Anyhow, the Gallery turned the kid
down and asked for police protection.  The immediate fate of the Owl is
not known.

Vague rumors suggest that sometime during the next twenty years the Owl was
dumped off the Ross Island Bridge into the Willamette, where it lay among
the fish until winched out by some resourceful Reedies.  The reasons for
this watery sojourn are, alas, lost to history.

In 1970 a panel discussion in Commons featured members of Nixon's Justice
Department.  All true Reedies, of course, plotted the embarassment of
Tricky Dick's minions, and therefore the Doyle Owl rode a little red
wagon into the middle of the sober forum.  All hell broke loose in front
of the horrified visitors.  After a huge melee in which many fire extinguishers
were emptied, the Owl was dropped on the pavement and broken into bits.
Undaunted, the frenzied mob fought over the pieces.  Later, the main base 
of the Owl appeared intact on President Thompson's doorstep.  Alumni
Director Florence Lehman had a new head cast and the Owl, somewhat the
worse for wear, was returned to circulation.

Lehman's cloning of the new Owl from the pieces of the old was laudable.  But
some less honorable Reedies took her example as license to create fakes 
galore, which continue to plague us today.  One fake Owl, however, was 
benign.  Its story begins in Lincoln,
Nebraska, where a peripatetic Reedie was spending a boring Christmas break.
It seems that two three foot owls adorned the facade of a University of
Nebraska building.  Their resemblance to the Doyle Owl was profound.  To see
them was to want them.  This was easier said than done since these birds were
mounted at the top of the building, three stories up.  But when there's an
Owl there's a way, and this young Reedie laid careful plans.

Tools were gathered and a strike force was recruited.  A ladder was taken
from a local fraternity house.  In the darkest hours of the new year the 
Reedie and his friends struck.  One of the birds was lifted.  The intrepid
Reedie and his new owl successfully escaped to Reed, leaving the fraternity
house ladder behind to point the finger in the wrong direction.  (This
proved unnecessary: no one noticed that the bird was gone until mid-February,
when the Daily Nebraskan ran a story on the missing bird.  When interviewed,
one janitor claimed that the bird had been missing for five years.)

Safely back in Portland, our Reedie began devising plans for his new owl.
Being made of copper sheet metal, it wasn't really suitable for showing.
But the beauty of its form was put to good use through the miracle of
modern plastics.  A fiberglass mold was made and soon polyurethane foam
owls were rolling off the assembly line.  April Fool's Day 1977 saw the debut
of this new art form, with fake foam owls appearing in such likely locations
as the canyon (floating) and the International Studies Committee annual
meeting.  At the social that night one fake owl was burned atop a huge pile
of old Quests while the real Owl, in a carefully coordinated arrangement with
its current owner, whizzed past in a white Datsun.  The usual high-speed
chase around Portland ensued, but possession was retained.

In the last few years, the Owl has taken to visiting distant places and
interesting people.  It made its way to Hollywood where real-world band
Tears for Fears got hold of it and put it in one of their videos.  Reedies
promptly sent out a commando squad to put an end to this travesty, but
they grabbed the Owl and took off with it themselves.  The 1989 Handbook
tried to borrow it from its possessors, on the excuse that they needed it
for a cover photo.  Its guardians promptly decamped to Seattle, forcing the 
Handbook people to airbrush in a 1935 photo.  They got the scale wrong, making
the Owl appear to fill the entire Eliot Hall doorway and convincing an
entire generation of freshlings that a two ton Owl was hidden somewhere
on campus.

At the Halloween social in 1990 the Owl, now without its historic base, 
dangled on a chain beneath the cross-canyon bridge.  After two people waded 
naked into the Canyon to tie on a rope, someone counted off, "One, two, 
three, heave!" as a hundred Reedies
pulled the Owl back up to the bridge, whereupon a few lucky people at the 
front grabbed it and ran off.  The administration insisted that the subsequent 
replacement of the bridge had nothing to do with the strain placed on it 
during this incident.  The new possessors took time off from redesigning
downtown street signs to cart the Owl off to Disneyland, where they had to
defend it against a busload of Japanese tourists overcome by Owl Fever.

At a Renn Fayre soon after this incident, the Owl was covered in
Crisco and set afire.  After the flame went out, a struggle ensued as
hundreds of Reedies tried to push the still-heated owl into one of two 
competing cars.  Eventually it was forced into one of them and whisked off 
to safety.  Unfortunately, the winners of this battle cannot have been
True Reedies, for the Owl now entered a period of retirement heretofore
unknown, and entire classes of Reedies passed through the school without
once seeing the sacred bird.

The Owl did not appear again until a 1996 Midnight Theater, where
a lucky few got to see it in the back of a U-Haul before greedy alums 
chased off its still-nervous guardians, who had stolen it themselves only a 
few days before.  It soon emerged that the Owl was in the possession of a 
group styling itself the Doyle Owl Patrol.  The group, having only one
tiny car among them, used U-Haul trucks so frequently that 
Reedies who were merely moving out of the dorms were mobbed by crowds 
demanding to see the Owl.  The DOP was not terrifically successful at showing
the Owl, being chased off rapidly by crowds of Owl-starved Reedies at every
turn.  However, they did succeed in getting the Owl into photo sessions with
famous Reed alums Dr. Demento and Steve Jobs (Jobs' reported comment: "The
Doyle what?").  

After casting a remarkably ugly new base, the DOP announced a 
collection of the Owl Trading Cards they had distributed at each showing,
worth several "time' points" each.  At Thesis Parade the Owl was momentarily 
cornered in an administrator's office but soon emerged, escorted by a Community
Safety Officer, to be locked by a chain to a railing outside Eliot.  As
drunken seniors paraded, the winners of the trading card competition arrived
with the key and whisked the Owl away.  Where it will appear next is anybody's
guess.

SIDEBAR

As we go to press, we learn that this summer, as a researching Reedie dug 
deep into the dusty stacks of the British Museum, she found an illustrated 
medieval text entitled ASIO FLAMMEUS DOYLEUM, apparently a prophecy whose 
subject is our very own Doyle Owl!  We present her translation below.

In the last days ye shall find the great [stone?] OWL, whose name shall be
DOYLE.  And he shall pass through the water, yea, and the flame untouched,
and the angel of GOD shall be with him in all things.  And ye shall obey the 
COMMANDMENTS of the OWL, [which are:]

1. Thou shalt know thy OWL by these his three stigmata: the bent screws 
found in his ears, the steel rod which protudes from his ample bottom, and 
his enormous weight.  Thou shalt accept no fake owls, yea, neither of 
plaster, nor of bronze, nor of [baser?] things.

2. Thou shalt show thy OWL, yea, to the entire city.  In this you will add
to his glory, so long as you show him only as he has never been shown before.
Fear not that he should be taken from you, for I have made a covenant that in 
the end he shall return and be with you forever.

3. Thou shalt travel with thy OWL and bring him to the great persons and the
sacred places of the world.  In each place ye shall record by picture that
thy OWL hast conquered yet another people and city, to make him ever
more glorious.

4. Thou shalt never leave thy OWL in the possession of an unbeliever, yea,
neither alum nor [baser?] person.  Thou shalt defend him ever, even to the
utmost, but without causing harm to any person.

