Douglas Squirrel
Age 34, married
Clean, full UK driving license
American with full settlement in UK (no work restrictions)
British citizenship pending
5 Branden Drive,
Knutsford,
Cheshire,
WA16 8EJ.
+44 7812 995 456
ds@douglassquirrel.com

Experience
2002-present	 youDevise Ltd.
London and Manchester 

Chief Technology Officer (Nov 2002 - present). Provided technical leadership during sale and delivery of four major projects: 
* A three-year build-and-operate contract with a consortium of eight global investment banks for a trade-ideas application. During bid, ensured youDevise stood out from competitors by presenting working prototype and detailed technical architecture. During requirements and build, continued to build application with team of four coders, leading regular reviews with customers to evolve the specification and simultaneously training coders, none of whom had written commercial Java code before. Currently run development team of six developers plus QA team of five part-time testers, providing mentoring, training, and architectural direction as they extend the application and move to a more agile development model. Application now in production at four banks and several hedge funds, with over 700 users. Monthly releases provide many new features and provide significant advantage in active market containing at least three significant competitors.
* A four-contractor, two-year contract for a billing implementation at a FTSE 100 company (United Utilities). Sold performance of product to skeptical IT staff. During build, consulted on performance, database changes, and application design with developers, and led tactical squads of 2-6 people to rescue late deliverables. Saw project through to end of engagement; application is now in production for 3 million water customers.
* A two-firm contract for a fund-of-hedge-funds product, scheduled for production in March 2006 after five months' development. Supervise team of two developers and three business analysts. Team use agile development methods, providing weekly production-quality releases, regular client feedback sessions to review these releases, and full unit-test coverage to reduce defects.
* Ongoing internal project for a platform used to rapidly develop and deploy financial applications. Platform, built entirely with open-source software, scales to thousands of simultaneous users and includes 
  o several flavours of single sign-on
  o agent processes with automated failover
  o alerting for failures, errors, and performance violations 
  o database-agnostic object-relational mapping
  o one-click build and release management
  o pluggable interfaces for email and market data

1999-2002	  TenFold Corporation
San Francisco and London

Project Manager (Oct 2000 - Nov 2002). Planned and executed complex, record-breaking billing application benchmark, managing team of 4-6 developers to manufacture 3 terabytes of artificial data, simulate 2400 concurrent end-users, and execute ten batch processing steps. After three months' preparation, tested and tuned for six weeks in performance centre, organising and motivating team to work 24 hours a day, seven days a week in shifts. Met all benchmark targets to customer's satisfaction. Repeated similar, smaller benchmark for another customer's application, then managed several performance, coding, and testing projects for customers in Manchester, London, and New York simultaneously.

Software Developer (Jun 1999 - Sep 2000). Improved integration, quality, and usability of data-feeding and data-validation components of enterprise application. Revised C code to produce 33% improvement in speed of data imports. Constructed and supervised nightly integration testing process for development teams in two cities on Sun and Windows systems. Won company-wide award for precision execution.

1997, 1998		   Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany
Guest Scientist. Invented and analysed number-theoretic algorithms. Implemented these algorithms using C++ as part of an integrated number theory library.

Skills and Qualities
Executive
Describing revolutionary technology in business-friendly terms
Presenting strategic technology options to Board of Directors
Negotiating complex contract terms involving several contractors and customers
Advising senior management on industry trends and best practices 

Managerial
Evolving team processes to include agile methods without losing productivity 
Training new team members to use unfamiliar tools 
Retaining high-skilled but high-strung super-coders while gently improving ability to work with others
Designing fully automated processes that guarantee quality on every check-in
Turning around a troubled project by making small gains quickly
Tracking project progress in a simple and transparent way to help customers set sensible goals and cut scope to make targets

Technical
Languages: Java, C, C++, HTML, Perl, PHP, SQL, UML, XML, XSLT
Operating systems: Microsoft Windows, Unix  (Solaris, Linux, and others)
Application tools: Oracle, MySQL, Hibernate, Tomcat
Development tools: NetBeans, Ant, CruiseControl, Emma, FindBugs

Personal
Speaking and writing German
Cricket umpire in Cheshire County League

Education
1997-1999 University of California at Berkeley
Master's and candidate's degrees in mathematics. National Science Foundation Graduate Fellow. Thesis on computing kernels of integer matrices.

1995-1997 Reed College, Portland, Oregon
Bachelor of Arts degree in mathematics. Phi Beta Kappa honours society. Thesis on computing reciprocity symbols in number fields.




Portfolio of design and project-management products available on request






Page 4		Book



